Added editorial for william and robot cf 104002 e (#3834)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/silver/cf-104002E.mdx

---
id: cf-104002E
source: CF
title: William and Robot
author: Alex Du
---

## Explanation

First note that the only requirement for a valid solution is that for any even number $k \leq n$, William must have selected at most $\frac{k}{2}$ integers.

To solve this problem, we can use a greedy algorithm.

For any even $k$, if we know the $\frac{k}{2}$ integers that make the highest sum, we can use this to find the $\frac{k}{2}+1$ integers for $k+2$.

The base case is $k = 2$, where the highest sum is simply the maximum of the first two integers.

Similarly, to gain the highest sum for our current $k$, we will always select the maximum of the $k-1$ and $k-2$ elements, since we now have another turn and this will build directly off of our previous solution.

> However, it is sometimes optimal to take both integers, rather than just the maximum of the two. After $k=2$, we can choose to remove any previous integer we selected and replace it with the minimum of the two integers we are currently considering. Since we can remove any integer, we will remove the minimum. Therefore, this is only worth it if the minimum of the two integers is greater than the minimum of all the integers we already selected. We need to quickly access and remove the smallest integer, so this can be done with a priority queue or a multiset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is sometimes optimal to take both integers, rather than just the maximum of the two. After $k=2$, we can choose to remove any previous integer we selected and replace it with the minimum of the two integers we are currently considering. Since we can remove any integer, we will remove the minimum. Therefore, this is only worth it if the minimum of the two integers is greater than the minimum of all the integers we already selected. To quickly access and remove the smallest integer, we can use either a priority queue or a multiset.
```

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;

	vector<int> a(n);
	for (int &i : a) { cin >> i; }

	// stores currently selected numbers
	multiset<int> taken;

	// cannot take both the first and second number
	taken.insert(max(a[0], a[1]));

	for (int i = 2; i < n; i += 2) {
		int smallest_taken = *taken.begin();

		// if it is worth it to give up a previous number

> 		// to select both, give up the smallest

Reviewer: multiline comment please

		if (smallest_taken < min(a[i], a[i + 1])) {
			// erase using pointer, not value, since multiset will erase

> 			// all elements of the same value if value is passed in

Reviewer: multiline here

---
id: cf-104002E
source: CF
title: William and Robot
author: Alex Du
---

## Explanation

First note that for any even number $k \leq n$, a valid solution must have selected at most $k/2$ integers. This is the only requirement for a valid solution.

To solve this problem, we can use a greedy algorithm. For any even $k$, if we know the $k/2$ integers that make the highest sum, we can use this to find the $k/2+1$ integers for $k+2$.

> The base case is $k = 2$, where the highest sum is simply the max of the first two integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base case is $k = 2$, where the highest sum is simply the maximum of the first two integers.
```

> Similarly, we can always select the max of the $k-1$ and $k-2$ elements, since we will still be one step ahead of the robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, we can always select the maximum of the $k-1$ and $k-2$ elements, since we will still be one step ahead of the robot.
```

Reviewer: `since we will still be one step ahead of the robot.`

doesn't really make sense

> After $k=2$, it is sometimes optimal to select both the $k-1$ and $k-2$ elements. In this case, we must replace one of the previous integers we took. We can use a multiset to store all of our current integers, and remove the smallest one when the minimum of the two integers is greater than our current minimum. Since we only access the smallest integer at a time, this can also be done with a priority queue.

Reviewer: ```
and remove the smallest one when the minimum of the two integers is greater than our current minimum
```

should be reworded

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;

	vector<int> a(n);

> 	for (int &i : a) cin >> i;

Reviewer 2: braces

	// stores currently selected numbers
	multiset<int> taken;

	// cannot take both the first and second number
	taken.insert(max(a[0], a[1]));

	for (int i = 2; i < n; i += 2) {
		int smallest_taken = *taken.begin();

		// if it is worth it to give up a previous number to take both, give up

> 		// the smallest

Reviewer 2: can you even out this comment

		if (smallest_taken < min(a[i], a[i + 1])) {
			// erase using pointer, not value, since multiset will erase

> 			// all elements of the same value if value is passed in

Reviewer: multiline

Reviewer 2: if it's just two lines it's fine

			taken.erase(taken.begin());
			taken.insert(a[i]);
			taken.insert(a[i + 1]);
		}
		// take the max of the two otherwise

> 		else {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		} else {
		// otherwise, take the max of the 2

			taken.insert(max(a[i], a[i + 1]));
		}
	}

	long long ans = 0;

> 	// sum up answer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// sum up the answer
```

---
id: cf-104002E
source: CF
title: William and Robot
author: Alex Du
---

## Explanation

> First note that the only requirement for a valid solution is that for any even number $k \leq n$, William must have selected at most $\frac{k}{2}$ integers.

Reviewer 2: elaborate on this a lil

To solve this problem, we can use a greedy algorithm. For any even $k$, if we know the $k/2$ integers that make the highest sum, we can use this to find the $k/2+1$ integers for $k+2$.

The base case is $k = 2$, where the highest sum is simply the max of the first two integers.

Similarly, we can always select the max of the $k-1$ and $k-2$ elements, since we will still be one step ahead of the robot.

After $k=2$, it is sometimes optimal to select both the $k-1$ and $k-2$ elements. In this case, we must replace one of the previous integers we took. We can use a multiset to store all of our current integers, and remove the smallest one when the minimum of the two integers is greater than our current minimum. Since we only access the smallest integer at a time, this can also be done with a priority queue.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;

	vector<int> a(n);
	for (int &i : a) cin >> i;

> 	multiset<int> taken;

Reviewer 2: comment for what this does

	// cannot take both the first and second number
	taken.insert(max(a[0], a[1]));

	for (int i = 2; i < n; i += 2) {
		int smallest_taken = *taken.begin();

		// if it is worth it to give up a previous number to take both, give up
		// the smallest
		if (smallest_taken < min(a[i], a[i + 1])) {
			// erase using pointer, not value, since multiset will erase
			// all elements of the same value if value is passed in
			taken.erase(taken.begin());
			taken.insert(a[i]);
			taken.insert(a[i + 1]);
		}
		// take the max of the two otherwise
		else {
			taken.insert(max(a[i], a[i + 1]));
		}
	}

	long long ans = 0;

	// sum up answer

> 	for (int t : taken) ans += t;

Reviewer 2: braces

	cout << ans << endl;
}
```

</CPPSection>

<PySection>

</PySection>

<JavaSection>

</JavaSection>

> </LanguageSection>

Reviewer 2: ayo?

## Explanation

> First note that the only requirement for a valid solution is that for any even number $k \leq n$, William must have selected at most $\frac{k}{2}$ integers out of the first $k$ integers. It is impossible to select more than $\frac{k}{2}$ integers in the first $k$ integers, since the robot will have taken all other $\frac{k}{2}$ integers by the time you can choose your next integer. Note that it is also possible to "save" your choices, since you can choose less than $\frac{k}{2}$ integers for $k < n$, allowing you to choose more for a larger $k$.

Reviewer 2: i was thinking an example ngl

Author: alr, added example
